Add v0.2 release to README (#323)
cornerstone-data/bedrock: RELEASE_NOTES_V0.2.md

- [pending codebase cleanup] **Per-flag ablation configs** (e.g. `..._ghg_electricity.yaml`, `..._a_price_index.yaml`, `..._taxonomy_and_B_transformation.yaml`) — each isolates a single change against the v0.1 baseline so the marginal impact of that methodological choice can be measured.

A separate `snapshot_version_or_git_sha` field enumerates the v0.1 baseline (`1bda811…`) and the v0.2 SHAs (`2ebb51f…`, `9fe22d9…`), so diagnostic runs can compare current output against any released baseline.

### 1.2. Validation and reproducibility
Pandera schemas guard DataFrames at module boundaries; snapshot tests under `bedrock/transform/__tests__/` (marker `eeio_integration`) cover every config in `configs/`, and continuous integration (CI) blocks accidental drift. A `uv` lockfile pins Python and dependencies, and Google Cloud Platform (GCP)-backed artifact storage carries the resolved `USAConfig.to_dict()` with every output — the matrices are self-describing with respect to the methodology that produced them.

> ## 2. Releases: v0 → v0.2

Reviewer: this is the most important section in terms of explaining what we did. I'd be more specific on changes and link to the discussions we had on methods for the most important ones. For example what is the "new methodology reconciling data years"? -> link to the github issue.

Author: will discuss this in a separate paper about the v0 -> v0.2 change

- **v0** - baseline
- **v0.1** — CEDA v7 schema, legacy GHG methodology largely inherited from CEDA-US, methodology flags mostly absent or defaulted off. The first reproducible reference point.
- **v0.2** — default config flipped to `2025_usa_cornerstone_full_model.yaml`. It brings:
  - Cornerstone 2026 schema (405 sectors, compared to 411 in USEEIO and 400 in CEDA-US) on by default.
  - Waste-sector disaggregation (1 → 7) with explicit weights.
  - A new methodology reconciling data years between E and B matrices, an upgrade from USEEIO and CEDA-US.
  - Overhauled GHG methods for transportation, electricity, agricultural soils, petroleum & natural-gas systems, refrigerants, and "other" gases — each individually gated and individually snapshot-tested.
  - Per-config diagnostic comparison against the v0.1 baseline via `snapshot_version_or_git_sha`.

The internal-review draft of the methods paper corresponds to the v0.2 configuration; readers who open the paper alongside `2025_usa_cornerstone_full_model.yaml` will see the full picture, subject to the paper/code coverage caveats above.

> ## 3. Diagnostic results: v0.2 vs USEEIO and CEDA-US benchmarks

Reviewer: Should we add a high level summary of the changes not just numbers but our interpretation of the numbers and why the changes made sense to us? Something like:
- The merged model sits between the USEEIO and CEDA-US , resulting in a media decrease of EFs against the USEEIO and a median increase against CEDA-US. 
- The main driver for the increase in emission factors against CEDA-US is the change in the electricity sector caused by the B transformation, followed by X and X
- The main driver for the decrease in emission factors against USEEIO is XX.

The sectors that saw the largest changes against CEDA US are XX because XX
The sectors that saw the largest changes against USEEIO are XX because XX

These results match the developers expectations for this milestone.

Author: per our discussion, I will move section 3 out of this doc for now and address your comment in a separate doc.

v0.2 is compared against two external benchmarks in parallel:
- **USEEIO** — USEEIOv2.6.0-phoebe-23 on [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/17457336).
- **CEDA-US** — US portion of the multi-regional CEDA model.

> ### 3.1. Headline numbers

Reviewer: What do we mean by top 3 flags by impact on B matrix entries? I would just highlight the top 4 sectors with largest absolute changes and the directions they are going (e.g. electricity increase in CEDA)

Author: Let's discuss headline numbers in a separate doc.

> # About Bedrock v0.2: The Cornerstone U.S. Model

Author: @Yohanna1906 here is the v0.2 doc you can review

# Bedrock v0.2: The Cornerstone U.S. EEIO Model

## What v0.2 means

> Bedrock v0.2 is the first release in which **USEEIO and CEDA-US are merged** into a single, configurable U.S. national EEIO (Environmentally-Extended Input-Output) model USEEIO is the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) legacy United States (US) EEIO model; CEDA-US (Comprehensive Environmental Data Archive) is the US portion of Watershed's proprietary Multi-Regional EEIO (MRIO) model. v0.2 brings in methodological contributions and improvements from both — a reworked sector schema, an updated approach to reconcile data years between the E matrix (environmental extensions) and B matrix (per-dollar emissions intensities), and a merged attribution model for per-sector greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions — with every choice between the two lineages explicit as a typed configuration flag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bedrock v0.2 is the first release in which **USEEIO and CEDA-US are merged** into a single, configurable U.S. national EEIO (Environmentally-Extended Input-Output) model. USEEIO is a US specific legacy EEIO model originally developed by the US EPA. CEDA-US (Comprehensive Environmental Data Archive) is the US portion of Watershed's proprietary Multi-Regional EEIO (MRIO) model. v0.2 brings in methodological contributions and improvements from both which includes a reworked sector schema, an updated approach to reconcile data years between the E matrix (environmental extensions) and B matrix (per-dollar emissions intensities), and a merged attribution model for per-sector greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions.
```

> v0.2 is a **waypoint**, not the end state. Cornerstone's global MRIO model, targeted for release in **October 2026**, will combine the best of USEEIO and CEDA. The U.S. module is the first country to go through that merge, and v0.2 captures the result of that integration work — a reproducible, fully-specified U.S. EEIO model whose every methodological decision is traceable to a named flag, a YAML file, and a snapshot test against the v0.1 baseline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
v0.2 is a **waypoint**, not the end state. Cornerstone's global MRIO model, targeted for release in **October 2026**, will combine the best of USEEIO and CEDA.
```

v0.2 produces emission factors (EFs) in the unit of dollar of output in **USD 2023, producer prices** (set by `model_base_year: 2023` and `price_type: producer` in `USAConfig`). Downstream consumers should deflate/inflate or convert to purchaser prices outside `bedrock` if a different basis is needed.

v0.2 is stable for use now. The config-driven patterns it establishes — typed methodology flags, YAML-as-experiment, snapshot-validated output — carry forward into the MRIO release, so effort invested in v0.2 is not throwaway.

> *Companion documents:* the **Cornerstone U.S. National Model: Methodology Overview** covers the *what* (equations, data sources, methodological choices adopted from USEEIO vs CEDA). The **Cornerstone Technical Architecture Vision** covers the *why* (an Extract-Transform-Load (ETL) monorepo architecture, global MRIO end state). This document — `bedrock` as the *how* — walks the v0.2 config surface (§1), release notes (§2), diagnostic shifts against v0.1 and USEEIO (§3), and the path toward the October 2026 MRIO release (§4–5).

---

## 1. Methodology as configuration

> The headline claim of v0.2 is that **every methodological decision involved in merging USEEIO and CEDA-US is a typed flag on `USAConfig`** (`bedrock/utils/config/usa_config.py`). The methods paper is the narrative; the config is the executable contract. Flipping a flag is a methodological change — tracked in git, testable via snapshots, and recorded as provenance metadata on every output artifact.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The headline claim of v0.2 is that **every methodological decision involved in merging USEEIO and CEDA-US is validated using a configuration specifically `USAConfig`** (`bedrock/utils/config/usa_config.py`). Changes to the configuration adjusts the methodology so individual changes can be validated via snapshots.
```

> Flags group into five themes, each mapping to a section of the methods paper:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Configurations are organized into five themes, each mapping to a section of the methods paper:
```

> | Group | Representative flags | Paper section |

Reviewer 2: Should we move this section to a readme?

Reviewer: similarly, I was getting confused between between section 1. Methodology choices captured in configuration and section 2. Releases because the changes are not comparable (e.g. the 5 things listed as changes in the release vs. the items on the table). I think either we separate these section into one specific for how to replicate the snapshots (perhaps on a read me) or make these two reconcilable and clear on what they intend to do.

Author: moved section 2 to release notes, moving section 1 to README

  - Per-config diagnostic comparison against the v0.1 baseline via `snapshot_version_or_git_sha`.

The internal-review draft of the methods paper corresponds to the v0.2 configuration; readers who open the paper alongside `2025_usa_cornerstone_full_model.yaml` will see the full picture, subject to the paper/code coverage caveats above.

## 3. Diagnostic results: v0.2 vs USEEIO benchmark

*[Headline numbers pending from the most recent per-flag ablation runs.]*
- Overall shift in total economy-wide GHG footprint from v0.2 full model, measured against USEEIOv2.6.0-phoebe-23 released on [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/17457336).
- Top three flags by impact — which single methodological change moves the matrix the most.
- Sectors whose emissions intensity shifts by more than a stated threshold.

*[Figures]*:

(1) histogram
  - (1a) emission-factor (EF) %-change
  - (1b) EF absolute change

(2) x–y plots vs USEEIO
  - (2a) EF size (x-axis) vs EF %-change (y-axis)
  - (2b) EF absolute change (x-axis) vs EF %-change (y-axis)

> (3) stacked-bar chart showing where the differences are from.

Author: @bl-young after chatting with Yoha, I think it's okay to only show the easy-to-create stacked-bar chart here. Then for later in June, we'd want to show the waterfall chart probably with high-level buckets, e.g. CEDA-USEEIO merge, Data Update, Bug Fixes, etc.

A compact table will show, per flag group, the direction and rough magnitude of effect on B-matrix entries (↑ / ↓ / ≈) with a one-line interpretation, and columns for both the v0.1 and USEEIO baselines. These numbers are internally consistent — generated against pinned snapshot baselines — and should be read as "how the method moved" rather than as a claim of improved accuracy; the latter requires external validation. Readers who want to reproduce an individual comparison can run the corresponding per-flag config YAML.

## 4. How `bedrock` fits into Cornerstone

> `bedrock` is the U.S. national implementation of the ETL pipeline set out in the Architecture Vision. v0.2 is the module to complete the USEEIO and CEDA-US merge where the best methodologies from both models are adopted. The config-driven methodology pattern utilized in `bedrock` v0.2 will extend to additional geographies in the global MRIO framework to faciliate traceability of methodological choices at the global level.

Reviewer 2: Let's spend some time wordsmithing or rewriting this paragraph it smells of AI. Happy to sit down and write this so it makes sense.

Also is it worth adding this paragraph to a readme rather than release notes?

Author: I don't hold a strong opinion on where to put it. Let's discuss about it!

Author: Wes merged it in https://github.com/cornerstone-data/bedrock/pull/325 and I merged it in

> # Bedrock v0.2: The Cornerstone U.S. EEIO Model

Author: maybe we want to call it "The Cornerstone's USEEIO and CEDA-US merged model", I'm open to suggestions

Reviewer 3: I recommend "Cornerstone's U.S. model" . This is temporary but it keeps it simple and connected easily with Method docs and discussions

## What v0.2 means

Bedrock v0.2 is the first release in which **USEEIO and CEDA-US are merged** into a single, configurable U.S. national EEIO (Environmentally-Extended Input-Output) model USEEIO is the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) legacy United States (US) EEIO model; CEDA-US (Comprehensive Environmental Data Archive) is the US portion of Watershed's proprietary Multi-Regional EEIO (MRIO) model. v0.2 brings in methodological contributions and improvements from both — a reworked sector schema, an updated approach to reconcile data years between the E matrix (environmental extensions) and B matrix (per-dollar emissions intensities), and a merged attribution model for per-sector greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions — with every choice between the two lineages explicit as a typed configuration flag.

> v0.2 is a **waypoint**, not the end state. Cornerstone's global MRIO model, targeted for release in **October 2026**, will combine the best of USEEIO and CEDA. The U.S. module is the first country to go through that merge, and v0.2 captures the result of that integration work — a reproducible, fully-specified U.S. EEIO model whose every methodological decision is traceable to a named flag, a YAML file, and a snapshot test against the v0.1 baseline.

Reviewer 3: Why not refer to v0.2 as a beta release?

> v0.2 is a **waypoint**, not the end state. Cornerstone's global MRIO model, targeted for release in **October 2026**, will combine the best of USEEIO and CEDA. The U.S. module is the first country to go through that merge, and v0.2 captures the result of that integration work — a reproducible, fully-specified U.S. EEIO model whose every methodological decision is traceable to a named flag, a YAML file, and a snapshot test against the v0.1 baseline.

Reviewer 3: What is the v0.1 baseline - this needs to be described.

v0.2 produces emission factors (EFs) in the unit of dollar of output in **USD 2023, producer prices** (set by `model_base_year: 2023` and `price_type: producer` in `USAConfig`). Downstream consumers should deflate/inflate or convert to purchaser prices outside bedrock if a different basis is needed.

> v0.2 is stable for use now. The config-driven patterns it establishes — typed methodology flags, YAML-as-experiment, snapshot-validated output — carry forward into the MRIO release, so effort invested in v0.2 is not throwaway.

Reviewer 3: Just "v0.2 is stable" is sufficient.  The following sentence is too commentary like and too jargony.
